feat: Add @xmcp-dev/descope plugin for OAuth 2.1 auth (#587)
basementstudio/xmcp: apps/website/content/docs/integrations/descope.mdx

---

## Installation

Install the Descope plugin:

<TerminalTabs
  tabs={[
    {
      label: "pnpm",
      value: "pnpm",
      content: "pnpm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "npm",
      value: "npm",
      content: "npm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "yarn",
      value: "yarn",
      content: "yarn add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "bun",
      value: "bun",
      content: "bun add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
  ]}
  defaultTab="pnpm"
/>

## Descope Setup

MCP clients use Dynamic Client Registration (DCR) and OAuth 2.1 to authenticate. Configure your Descope project so your xMCP server can participate in the agentic OAuth flow.

### 1. Create a Project

If you don't already have one, create a project at [app.descope.com](https://app.descope.com). Copy the **Project ID** from your project settings. It will be formatted like `Pxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx`.

### 2. Create an Agentic MCP Server

1. Go to **Descope Console** → **Agentic Identity Hub** → **MCP Servers**
2. Click **+ MCP Server**
3. Set a name and your server's base URL (e.g., `http://127.0.0.1:3001` for local development)
4. Copy the **MCP Server ID**

> The MCP Server ID wires your xMCP server to Descope's agentic OAuth endpoints. MCP clients use these endpoints for Dynamic Client Registration and token exchange.

Reviewer: Hi @joshwertheim! Just a quick note: xmcp is all lowercase. Please change all instances.

Author: Hey there. Apologies, just pushed a commit fixing this typo.

---

## Installation

Install the Descope plugin:

<TerminalTabs
  tabs={[
    {
      label: "pnpm",
      value: "pnpm",
      content: "pnpm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "npm",
      value: "npm",
      content: "npm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "yarn",
      value: "yarn",
      content: "yarn add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "bun",
      value: "bun",
      content: "bun add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
  ]}
  defaultTab="pnpm"
/>

## Descope Setup

MCP clients use Dynamic Client Registration (DCR) and OAuth 2.1 to authenticate. Configure your Descope project so your xmcp server can participate in the agentic OAuth flow.

### 1. Create an MCP Server Resource

1. Go to **Descope Console** → **Agentic Identity Hub** → **Resources**
2. Click **Create Resource** → **MCP Server**
3. Set a name and your server's base URL (e.g., `http://127.0.0.1:3001` for local development)
4. Copy the **Issuer URL**

The issuer URL identifies your resource and contains your project ID. The plugin parses both from it, so you only need this one value.

> ### 2. Create a Management Key (optional)

Reviewer: If this step is optional, it should not be numbered

Reviewer 2: @joshwertheim move this under Environment Variables and make it a subheader without a number

A management key is required to call `getUser()` or `getManagementClient()`. If you only need session data from the token, you can skip this step.

1. Go to **Descope Console** → **Company** → **Management Keys**
2. Click **+ Management Key**

> 3. Copy and save the key since it is only shown once

Reviewer: Save it where? Looking further in this file, I see that is added in the env, we should mention it here too

</Callout>

## Set up the Provider

Create a `middleware.ts` file in your xmcp app's `src` directory:

```typescript title="src/middleware.ts"
import { descopeProvider } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export default descopeProvider({
  issuerURL: process.env.DESCOPE_ISSUER_URL!,
  baseURL: process.env.BASE_URL!,
});
```

To enable user profile lookups, add the management key:

```typescript title="src/middleware.ts"
import { descopeProvider } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export default descopeProvider({
  issuerURL: process.env.DESCOPE_ISSUER_URL!,
  baseURL: process.env.BASE_URL!,
  managementKey: process.env.DESCOPE_MANAGEMENT_KEY,
});
```

### Configuration Options

- **`issuerURL`**: Issuer URL from your MCP Server resource in the Descope Console (required). Contains your project ID — no separate project ID field needed.
- **`baseURL`**: Base URL of your MCP server (required). Must match the URL configured on the resource in Descope.
- **`managementKey`**: (Optional) Descope management key. Required to use `getUser()` or `getManagementClient()`.

> - **`scopesSupported`**: (Optional) Array of OAuth scopes advertised in the resource metadata. Defaults to `["openid", "profile", "email"]`.

Reviewer: If we mentioned and showed how the middleware is built with optionals as the management key above, we should also add scopesSupported to illustrate a full middleware setup

};

export default function customClaims(): string {
  const { claims } = getSession();

  const plan = claims["plan"] as string | undefined;
  const orgId = claims["org_id"] as string | undefined;

  return JSON.stringify({ plan, orgId }, null, 2);
}
```

`session.claims` is typed as `Record<string, unknown>`, so cast each value to the type you expect after reading it.

## Get user profile

Use `getUser()` to fetch full user details from the Descope Management API. This requires `managementKey` to be set in your provider configuration.

### Example: Return full user profile

```typescript title="src/tools/user-profile.ts"
import type { ToolMetadata } from "xmcp";
import { getUser } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export const metadata: ToolMetadata = {
  name: "user-profile",
  description: "Returns the full Descope user profile for the authenticated user",
};

export default async function userProfile(): Promise<string> {
  const user = await getUser();
  return JSON.stringify(user, null, 2);
}
```

<Callout variant="warning">
  `getUser()` requires `managementKey` to be configured in `descopeProvider`. If the key is not set, the function throws an error.

> </Callout>

Reviewer: rmv this or the mention of the management key requirement from the first paragraph, as it creates too much redundancy

export default async function listRoles(): Promise<string> {
  const mgmt = getManagementClient();
  const resp = await mgmt.role.loadAll();
  return JSON.stringify(resp.data, null, 2);
}
```

## Fetch a connection token

Use `fetchConnectionToken()` to retrieve a stored OAuth access token from a [Descope connection](https://docs.descope.com/agentic-identity-hub/core-components/connections). This uses the user's own bearer token — no management key required.

```typescript title="src/tools/github-repos.ts"
import type { ToolMetadata } from "xmcp";
import { fetchConnectionToken } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export const metadata: ToolMetadata = {
  name: "github-repos",
  description: "Lists the authenticated user's GitHub repositories using a Descope connection token",
};

export default async function githubRepos(): Promise<string> {
  const accessToken = await fetchConnectionToken("github");

  const response = await fetch("https://api.github.com/user/repos", {
    headers: { Authorization: `Bearer ${accessToken}` },
  });
  const repos = await response.json();
  return JSON.stringify(repos, null, 2);
}
```

<Callout variant="info">

>   The connection must be configured in the Descope Console and the user must have granted access to it. The user's access token must include the `outbound.token.fetch` scope — add it to `scopesSupported` in your provider config so MCP clients can request it.

Reviewer: From what I understand, these are previous steps needed for this to work. If so, please mention them before the tool example to avoid any misunderstanding and unnatural flow while reading. If that’s not the case, feel free to dismiss this comment

Reviewer 2: What you actually need, is you need to make sure your MCP server scopes are mapped to the corresponding connection scopes that you want to fetch from our Connections Vault.

It's important to mention this, because otherwise you won't be able to access the Connection tokens in the MCP server with the `access_token`. A management key also works but then you lose policy control.

So @joshwertheim let's remove this callout entirely, and then let's add this information when you configure the MCP server itself above in Step 1.

publishedAt: "2026-06-05"
summary: "Add secure authentication to your MCP server using Descope"
description: "The Descope plugin provides authentication for your MCP server using Descope's OAuth 2.1 agentic identity system with Dynamic Client Registration."
---

## Installation

Install the Descope plugin:

<TerminalTabs
  tabs={[
    {
      label: "pnpm",
      value: "pnpm",
      content: "pnpm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "npm",
      value: "npm",
      content: "npm i @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "yarn",
      value: "yarn",
      content: "yarn add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
    {
      label: "bun",
      value: "bun",
      content: "bun add @xmcp-dev/descope",
    },
  ]}
  defaultTab="pnpm"
/>

## Descope Setup

MCP clients use Dynamic Client Registration (DCR) and OAuth 2.1 to authenticate. Configure your Descope project so your xmcp server can participate in the agentic OAuth flow.

### Create an MCP Server Resource

1. Go to **Descope Console** → **Agentic Identity Hub** → **Resources**
2. Click **Create Resource** → **MCP Server**
3. Set a name and your server's base URL (e.g., `http://127.0.0.1:3001` for local development)

> 4. Optional: Map your MCP server scopes to any corresponding connection scopes that are necessary to fetch from the Descope Connections Vault

Reviewer 2: Remove this

};

export default async function userProfile(): Promise<string> {
  const user = await getUser();
  return JSON.stringify(user, null, 2);
}
```

## Access the SDK clients

### `getClient()`

Returns the full Descope Node SDK client, giving you access to all Descope features from within your tool handlers.

```typescript title="src/tools/advanced.ts"
import { getClient, getSession } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export default async function advanced(): Promise<string> {
  const client = getClient();
  const session = getSession();

  // Use any Descope SDK method
  const resp = await client.management.user.loadByUserId(session.userId);
  return JSON.stringify(resp.data, null, 2);
}
```

### `getManagementClient()`

Returns the `management` namespace of the Descope SDK. Requires `managementKey` to be configured.

```typescript title="src/tools/list-roles.ts"
import { getManagementClient } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export default async function listRoles(): Promise<string> {
  const mgmt = getManagementClient();
  const resp = await mgmt.role.loadAll();
  return JSON.stringify(resp.data, null, 2);
}
```

## Fetch a connection token

> 

Reviewer 2: Make a callout here, to make it clear you need to map Connection scopes to MCP server scopes to fetch with the MCP server access token from the Connections Vault.

> Use `fetchConnectionToken()` to retrieve a stored OAuth access token from a [Descope connection](https://docs.descope.com/agentic-identity-hub/core-components/connections). This uses the user's own bearer token — no management key required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `fetchConnectionToken()` to retrieve a stored OAuth access token from a [Descope connection](https://docs.descope.com/agentic-identity-hub/core-components/connections). This uses the MCP Server's access token (no Management Key required).
```

}
```

> ## Fetch a provider token

Reviewer 2: Remove this as an example

```typescript title="src/tools/github-repos.ts"
import type { ToolMetadata } from "xmcp";
import { getManagementClient, getSession } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export const metadata: ToolMetadata = {
  name: "github-repos",
  description: "Lists the authenticated user's GitHub repositories using their stored GitHub token",
};

export default async function githubRepos(): Promise<string> {
  const { loginIds } = getSession();
  const mgmt = getManagementClient();

  const resp = await mgmt.user.getProviderToken(loginIds[0], "github");
  const { accessToken } = resp.data!;

  const response = await fetch("https://api.github.com/user/repos", {
    headers: { Authorization: `Bearer ${accessToken}` },
  });
  const repos = await response.json();
  return JSON.stringify(repos, null, 2);
}
```

<Callout variant="warning">
  `getManagementClient()` requires `managementKey` to be configured in `descopeProvider`. The provider token is only available if the user authenticated via that OAuth connection.
</Callout>

> ## Fetch an outbound app token

Reviewer 2: Fetch a "connection token"

> Use `getManagementClient()` to fetch a token for a [Descope outbound app](https://docs.descope.com/manage/outboundapps). Outbound apps are OAuth connections configured in Descope where Descope manages the client credentials and token lifecycle on your behalf.

Reviewer 2: Link to connections as opposed to outbound apps

```typescript title="src/tools/github-repos.ts"
import type { ToolMetadata } from "xmcp";
import { getManagementClient, getSession } from "@xmcp-dev/descope";

export const metadata: ToolMetadata = {
  name: "github-repos",
  description: "Lists the authenticated user's GitHub repositories using a Descope outbound app token",
};

export default async function githubRepos(): Promise<string> {
  const { userId } = getSession();
  const mgmt = getManagementClient();

>   const resp = await mgmt.outboundApplication.fetchToken("github", userId);

Reviewer 2: I think this uses a management key, what we should show is an example where you get the access token used with the MCP server and fetch the connection token with that, instead of using a management key.
